Unit-02-Linear-Programming-Problem.md, before:

# Unit 02: Linear Programming Problem

## Linear Programming Problem Model

1. Decision Variables

    - Identify what variables affect the outcome of the objective function. These are the variables you will solve for.

2. Objective Function

   - Determine the goal of the problem (maximize profit, minimize cost, etc.).
   - Express the objective as a linear function of the decision variables.

3. Constraints
   - List all the restrictions or limitations in the problem.
   - Represent these constraints as linear inequalities or equations involving the decision variables.

### Formulation of LPP

- [Numerical Problems](./Unit-02-Numericals.md)

#### Question 1

A factory produces two products P1 and P2. Each product requires time on two machines M1 and M2. The factory wants to determine how many units of each product to maximise its profilt.

- Each unit of P1 requires 2 hours on M1 and 1 hr on M2.
- Each unit of P2 requires 1 hour on M1 and 3 hr on M2.
- Machine M1 is available for 100 hours.
- Machine M2 is available for 90 hours. 
- The profit per unit of P1 is $40.
- The profit per unit of P2 is $40.

<u>Solution</u>

**Variables**

```
Let x be the no. of units of P1 produced.
Let y be the no. of units of P2 produced.
```

**Constrains**

```
2x+y ≤ 100
x+3y ≤  90
x, y ≥ 0
```

**Objective Function**

```
Max ≥ 40x+40y
```

#### Question 2

The Healthy Pet Food Company manufactures two types of dog food: `Meaties` and `Yummies`. Each package of Meaties contains `2 pounds of cereal` and `3 pounds of meat`; each package of Yummies contains `3 pounds of cereal` and `1.5 pounds of meat`. Healthy believes it can sell as much of each dog food as it can make. Meaties sell for `$2.80 per package` and Yummies sell for `$2.00 per package`. Healthy's production is limited in several ways.

- Healthy can buy only up to `400,000 pounds of cereal` each month at `$0.20 per pound`. 
- It can buy only up to `300,000 pounds of meat` per month at `$0.50 per pound`. 
- A special piece of machinery is required to make Meaties, and this machine has a capacity of `90,000 packages per month`. 
- The variable cost of blending and packing the dog food is `$0.25 per package` for Meaties and `$0.20 per package` for Yummies.

<u>Given</u>

`lb = pound`

`Availability of Cereal = 4,00,000`

`Buy: $0.2`

`Availability of Meat: 3,00,000`

`Buy: $0.5`

`Capacity of MAchine to make meat:  `

| Meaties          | Yummies          |
| :--------------- | :--------------- |
| 2lb + 3lb        | 3lb + 1.5lb      |
| Sell: $2.8       | Sell: $2         |
| Packaging: $0.25 | Packaging: $0.20 |

---

---

<u>Solution</u>

**Decision Variable**

```
Let x be the no. of package of meaties.
Let y be the no. of package of yummies.
```

**Profit of each package of Meaties**

```
Selling Price of Meaties = $2.8 per package,
Packaging Price of Meaties = $0.25 per package,

Cost of Cereal = $0.2 per pound,
Quantity of Cereal in Meaties = 2 lb per package,

Cost of Meat = $0.5 per pound,
Quantity of Meat in Meaties = 3 lb per package,

Profit of each package of Meaties = Selling Price of Meaties - Packaging Price of Meaties - (Cost of Cereal x Quantity of Cereal in Meaties) - (Cost of Meat x Quantity of Meat in Meaties)
= 2.8 - 0.25 - (0.2 * 2) - (0.5 * 3)
= 2.8 - 0.25 - 0.4 - 1.5
= 2.55 - 1.9
= 0.65
```

**Profit of each package of Yummies**

```
Selling Price of Yummies = $2 per package,
Packaging Price of Yummies = $0.2 per package,

Cost of Cereal = $0.2 per pound,
Quantity of Cereal in Yummies = 3 lb per package,

Cost of Meat = $0.5 per pound,
Quantity of Meat in Yummies = 1.5 lb per package,

Profit of each package of Yummies = Selling Price of Yummies - Packaging Price of Yummies - (Cost of Cereal x Quantity of Cereal in Yummies) - (Cost of Meat x Quantity of Meat in Yummies)
= 2 - 0.2 - (0.2 * 3) - (0.5 * 1.5)
= 2 - 0.2 - 0.6 - 0.75
= 1.8 - 1.35
= 0.45
```

**Objective Function**

```
Max Z ≥ 0.65x+0.45y
```

**Constraints**

```
2x+3y  ≤ 4,00,000
3x+1.5y  ≤ 3,00,000
x ≤ 90,000
x, y ≥ 0
```

Test

Commit message:

Main: add unboundness, infeasible soultion and degenracy

Unit-02-Linear-Programming-Problem.md, after:

# Unit 02: Linear Programming Problem

## Linear Programming Problem Model

1. Decision Variables

   - Identify what variables affect the outcome of the objective function. These are the variables you will solve for.

2. Objective Function

   - Determine the goal of the problem (maximize profit, minimize cost, etc.).
   - Express the objective as a linear function of the decision variables.

3. Constraints
   - List all the restrictions or limitations in the problem.
   - Represent these constraints as linear inequalities or equations involving the decision variables.

### Formulation of LPP

- [Numerical Problems](./Unit-02-Numericals.md)

#### Question 1

A factory produces two products P1 and P2. Each product requires time on two machines M1 and M2. The factory wants to determine how many units of each product to maximise its profilt.

- Each unit of P1 requires 2 hours on M1 and 1 hr on M2.
- Each unit of P2 requires 1 hour on M1 and 3 hr on M2.
- Machine M1 is available for 100 hours.
- Machine M2 is available for 90 hours.
- The profit per unit of P1 is $40.
- The profit per unit of P2 is $40.

<u>Solution</u>

**Variables**

```
Let x be the no. of units of P1 produced.
Let y be the no. of units of P2 produced.
```

**Constrains**

```
2x+y ≤ 100
x+3y ≤  90
x, y ≥ 0
```

**Objective Function**

```
Max ≥ 40x+40y
```

#### Question 2

The Healthy Pet Food Company manufactures two types of dog food: `Meaties` and `Yummies`. Each package of Meaties contains `2 pounds of cereal` and `3 pounds of meat`; each package of Yummies contains `3 pounds of cereal` and `1.5 pounds of meat`. Healthy believes it can sell as much of each dog food as it can make. Meaties sell for `$2.80 per package` and Yummies sell for `$2.00 per package`. Healthy's production is limited in several ways.

- Healthy can buy only up to `400,000 pounds of cereal` each month at `$0.20 per pound`.
- It can buy only up to `300,000 pounds of meat` per month at `$0.50 per pound`.
- A special piece of machinery is required to make Meaties, and this machine has a capacity of `90,000 packages per month`.
- The variable cost of blending and packing the dog food is `$0.25 per package` for Meaties and `$0.20 per package` for Yummies.

<u>Given</u>

`lb = pound`

`Availability of Cereal = 4,00,000`

`Buy: $0.2`

`Availability of Meat: 3,00,000`

`Buy: $0.5`

`Capacity of MAchine to make meat:  `

| Meaties          | Yummies          |
| :--------------- | :--------------- |
| 2lb + 3lb        | 3lb + 1.5lb      |
| Sell: $2.8       | Sell: $2         |
| Packaging: $0.25 | Packaging: $0.20 |

---

---

<u>Solution</u>

**Decision Variable**

```
Let x be the no. of package of meaties.
Let y be the no. of package of yummies.
```

**Profit of each package of Meaties**

```
Selling Price of Meaties = $2.8 per package,
Packaging Price of Meaties = $0.25 per package,

Cost of Cereal = $0.2 per pound,
Quantity of Cereal in Meaties = 2 lb per package,

Cost of Meat = $0.5 per pound,
Quantity of Meat in Meaties = 3 lb per package,

Profit of each package of Meaties = Selling Price of Meaties - Packaging Price of Meaties - (Cost of Cereal x Quantity of Cereal in Meaties) - (Cost of Meat x Quantity of Meat in Meaties)
= 2.8 - 0.25 - (0.2 * 2) - (0.5 * 3)
= 2.8 - 0.25 - 0.4 - 1.5
= 2.55 - 1.9
= 0.65
```

**Profit of each package of Yummies**

```
Selling Price of Yummies = $2 per package,
Packaging Price of Yummies = $0.2 per package,

Cost of Cereal = $0.2 per pound,
Quantity of Cereal in Yummies = 3 lb per package,

Cost of Meat = $0.5 per pound,
Quantity of Meat in Yummies = 1.5 lb per package,

Profit of each package of Yummies = Selling Price of Yummies - Packaging Price of Yummies - (Cost of Cereal x Quantity of Cereal in Yummies) - (Cost of Meat x Quantity of Meat in Yummies)
= 2 - 0.2 - (0.2 * 3) - (0.5 * 1.5)
= 2 - 0.2 - 0.6 - 0.75
= 1.8 - 1.35
= 0.45
```

**Objective Function**

```
Max Z ≥ 0.65x+0.45y
```

**Constraints**

```
2x+3y  ≤ 4,00,000
3x+1.5y  ≤ 3,00,000
x ≤ 90,000
x, y ≥ 0
```

## Unboundedness:

- A LLP is unbounded if the solution can be made infinitely large without violating any of the constraints in the problem
- will not be finite solution.
- unbounded solution condition exists at that condition when each elements of key column in either negative or zero.

## Infeasible solution

- Infeasibility means there is no solution which satisfies all the constraints.

## Degeneracy

- The phenomenon where we end up doing more iterations that we actually have to without improving this objective function value is called degeneracy.

- The tiew in minimum ratio ensures that on basisi variable takes value zero in next interation.
